Generate or Import Keys:
If you don't already have a key pair, you can generate one. If you have existing keys, you can skip this step.

To generate a new key pair:

sh
openssl req -new -x509 -newkey rsa:2048 -keyout MOK.priv -outform DER -out MOK.der -nodes -days 36500 -subj "/CN=My Secure Boot Key"
Enroll the MOK:
Use the mokutil command to import the key you want to enroll:

sh
sudo mokutil --import MOK.der
This command will prompt you to create a password. Remember this password as you will need it in the next step.

Reboot and Enroll Key:
Reboot your system. During the boot process, the MOK manager will appear. Follow these steps:

Select "Enroll MOK".
Select "Continue".
Enter the password you created earlier.
Confirm the enrollment.
Confirm Key Enrollment:
After the system boots up, you can confirm that the key has been enrolled by running:

sh
sudo mokutil --list-enrolled
Following these steps, you should be able to enroll the MOK key and have it appear at boot for enrollment. This process ensures that your system can recognize and trust your custom keys, which is essential for Secure Boot.

alright, now, after "sudo mokutil --list-enrolled" can i reboot and enable secure boot? and it should work now, right?
Yes, after you have successfully enrolled your Machine Owner Key (MOK) and verified it with sudo mokutil --list-enrolled, you can proceed to enable Secure Boot. Here are the steps to enable Secure Boot:

Reboot into BIOS/UEFI Settings:

Reboot your system.
During the boot process, enter your BIOS/UEFI settings. This generally involves pressing a key such as F2, F10, Delete, or Esc (the specific key depends on your motherboard/system manufacturer).
Enable Secure Boot:

Navigate to the Security or Boot tab in your BIOS/UEFI settings.
Find the option to enable Secure Boot and set it to Enabled.
Save your changes and exit the BIOS/UEFI settings.
Boot into Your Operating System:

The system should now boot with Secure Boot enabled.
Once Secure Boot is enabled, your system should recognize the enrolled MOK and allow the boot process to continue without issues. If there are any problems, you can revisit the MOK management tool to troubleshoot the enrolled keys.

If you encounter any specific errors or issues, feel free to ask for further assistance.

alright, im testing it now
Great! If you encounter any issues or have any further questions during the process, feel free to ask. I'm here to help. Good luck with enabling Secure Boot!

i entered the bios menu, and went to the dedicated tab, but now the secure boot option is grayed out and i cant enable it... i can only "clear all secure boot keys"... 
It sounds like Secure Boot might be disabled at a higher level, or there might be certain conditions that need to be met before it can be enabled. Here are a few steps you can try to resolve this issue:

Check for Administrator/Supervisor Password:

Some BIOS/UEFI settings require you to set an administrator or supervisor password before you can make changes to Secure Boot settings.
Go to the Security tab and set a password. Reboot and enter the BIOS/UEFI settings again to see if the Secure Boot option is now available.
Ensure Compatibility Mode (CSM) is Disabled:

The Compatibility Support Module (CSM) may need to be disabled to enable Secure Boot.
Look for an option related to CSM or Legacy Boot in the Boot tab and disable it. This might make the Secure Boot option available.
Clear Secure Boot Keys:

If the option to clear Secure Boot keys is available, you can try clearing them. This action might reset the Secure Boot settings and allow you to enable it.
Note: Clearing Secure Boot keys will remove all current keys, so ensure you have the necessary keys to re-enroll if needed.
Update BIOS/UEFI Firmware:

Sometimes, updating the BIOS/UEFI firmware can resolve issues with Secure Boot settings.
Check your motherboard or system manufacturer's website for any available updates and follow their instructions to update the firmware.
Restore Default Settings:

Some BIOS/UEFI settings might have been changed, causing Secure Boot to be grayed out. Restoring default settings can sometimes resolve this.
Look for an option to restore default settings or reset BIOS/UEFI settings to factory defaults.
Check Documentation:

Refer to your motherboard or system's manual for specific instructions on enabling Secure Boot. There may be model-specific steps or requirements.
If you've tried all of the above steps and the Secure Boot option is still grayed out, it might be helpful to contact your system or motherboard manufacturer's support for further assistance.
